# Authenticity

Adam Gordon's central conflict throughout *Atocha* seems to be the problem of authenticity: the distance between his inner self and how he presents himself to, or how he is perceived by, the world, be it the art world and the readers of his poetry or the women he falls for. The conflict arises out of Adam's central trait, his self-awareness. He's constantly analyzing his possible actions and their possible effects, in particular constructing his face and eyebrows to express impossibly precise attitudes, often in the realm of irony, thereby protecting himself from the vulnerability of authentically meaning what he says or does.

This distance is the key point: self-awareness is essentially a distance between your self and your self, and irony is essentially a distance between yourself and your actions/words. An image from (and actually repeated a few times through) the text that communicates this well is that of imagining being looked at by plane passengers. Adam includes this in one of his poems: "I imagined the passengers / Could see me, imagined I was / A passenger that could see me / Looking up..." [p. 40]. The image intimates the perpetual removal from one's immediate experience, always viewing one's experience as if in a plane thousands of feet in the sky. The image is strengthened by the fact that Adam is super high at the time he first looks up at a plane and has this imagining, further distancing himself from his immediate reality (q.v. the notes on drugs in the infinite-jest--leaving-atocha edge). This "seeing myself looking down at myself looking up" [p. 41] is reminiscent of the phrase "Por qué nací entre espejos" [p. 179], i.e. "Why was I born between mirrors" [p. 181], a quotation of Lorca.

Another interesting and sort of jarring example of this distance between self and self in the text is a sudden and brief switch from first to third person narration:

> He, if I can put it that way, had felt this as a child when they sent him to camp ... He became aware of a strange taste in his mouth; his saliva belonged to someone else; it made him sick to swallow. This he said to himself with authority, is a sign of schizophrenia; this is the beginning og the rapid fragmentation of your so-called personality; you will have to be hospitalized. He could feel the paper gown against his skin. ...
> 
> He would rush up the siz flights of stairs, find the key, drop the bag, and throw himself on the bed. He would cover himself entirely with the blanket. He would take my siesta then. [p. 16--17]

This self-awareness is a kind of vanity, so what sends Adam spiraling into drug-use in the middle of the book is the realization that Isabel and Teresa see right through all his analysis and calculation, and moreover attach far less significance to him than he had assumed in his knotted, inbent selfishness.

# Plurality

I think a key insight of *Atocha* is to connect this canonical postmodern problem of authenticity and self-awareness to the notion of *plurality* of possibility, in everything, but in particular within language.

This idea first appears in the text in the context of translation:

> something about home, but whether she meant a household or the literal structure, I couldn't tell; I heard the names of streets and months; a list of things I thought were books or songs; hard times or hard weather, epoch, uncle, change, an analogy involving summer, something abuying and/or crashing a red car. I formed several possible stories out of her speech, formed them at once, so it was less like I failed ot understand than that I understood in chords, understood in a plurality of worlds. Her uncle had died in a car crash a year ago today in a street in Salamanca; she had helped have he junky boyfriend hospitalizied over the summer and now he wouldn't see her and had moved to Barcelona; he parents who lived in a small town were having their home foreclosed upon and she had been sorting through boxes of childhood toys; she had broken with a sibling over the war. This ability to dwell among possible referents, to let them interfere and separate like waves, to abandon the law of excluded middle while listening to Spanish---this was a breakthrough in my project, a change of phase. I kept quiet, modeling my face on teh San Leocadio. [p. 14]

Adam's shoddy Spanish here at the outset of the novel exaggerates what happens even in expert translation: there is always a plurality of possible translations. I think the text also points to this happening not just in language-to-language translation, but in basically every part of the human experience: we are always perceiving some world of objects and events around us, and that perception and our interpretations of those perceptions are a kind of translation into our own language. And in that translation there is incredible room for plurality: objects can always be symbolic of objects; this is the "tragic interchangeability of nouns" [p. 145]. This plurality of interpretation also describes poetry---in fact Adam only seems to care about poetry in its ability to convey and

> echo of poetic possibility. Insofar as I was interested in the arts, I was interested in the disconnect between my experience of actual artworks and the claims made on their behalf; the closest I'd come to having a profound experience of art was probably the experience of this distance, a profound experience of the absence of profundity. [p. 9]

In a similar vein, he says,

> I told myself that no matter what I did, no matter what any poet did, the poems would constitute screens on which readers could project their own desperate belief in the possibility of poetic experience, whatever that might be, or afford them the opportunity to mourn its impossibility. [p. 38]

This kind of plurality appears probably on every page of this book. I'm exhausted just from flipping through and thinking of what examples to put here, so maybe I'll just leave myself to flip back through my in-book notes. One general example: the word "or" is used to great effect.

Anyway this all relates back to the problem of authenticity. The impossibility of authenticity is in a way precisely the problem of translation. How can one be authentic when communication is such a lossy and fraught process? This link between authenticity and translation and plurality is particularly striking at what is Adam's perhaps most (only?) honest moment in the novel:

> I said to her [Teresa] in English, "You are the most graceful and protean person I know. The way you handed me the coffee right when I awoke or the way just now you took the tequila from me or," I pasued to think of an example not involving drinks, "the way you can move without apparent transition from your stylish apartment to a protest ... But I'm worried you're too cool for me, that you'll realize I'm in fact a fraud. An inelegant fraud. I won't be able to fool you and you'll get bored" ...
> 
> "All you're describing," she said in Spanish, "is the personality of a translator. From apartment to protest, from English to Spanish." If she had spoken in English, I would have found it a little grand. In Spanish I found it profound. I wondered if she'd weighed the sentence in both languages before selecting the one that would produce the desired effect. [pp. 141--142]

Teresa, "protean" and "translator", is posed here as the antithesis of Adam, "inelegant fraud". Adam views the impossibility of authenticity as the inescapability of fraudulence, and so leans heavily into this fraudulence in his infinite self-awareness and vanity. Teresa rather *embraces* the impossibility of authenticity, i.e. embraces the plurality and elusiveness of identity, and "embrace[s] the tragic interchangeability of nouns" [p. 145]. That is, perhaps one must always view oneself as a translator, and in doing so give up on the impossible and quite possibly dangerous/useless notion of the authentic self (the authentic translation), "your own body 'giving up / Its shape in a gesture that expresses that shape.'" [p. 146].
