We consider B.I. #48 (*Brief Interviews With Hideous Men*, pp. 100--115), whose hideous man describes his process of picking out suitable "hens" from the women he dates to ask "How would you feel about my tying you up?" I claim we may read this hideous behavior as a search for empathy, and in Zizek's/Lacan's terminology, confirmation of the universality of the fear of being a subject of the looming, inaccessible, confounding big Other.

The interview is overtly psychological, the man stating that his mother is a "psychiatric case-worker" whose "imago all but rules my adult psychological life ... I have accepted this and reached an accord with it and have erected complex structures in which to come symbolically to terms with it and redeem it." Here I interpret "symbolically" as an explicit reference to the symbolic order, whose role as the big Other is being played by the mother---perhaps the big Mother. This interpretation is further supported by the fact that his mother "modeled speech and behavior" for he and his sister as children. The resulting constant use of "pedantic jargon" and accompanying "finger flexion" emphasizes his mother's wraith-like control of the language he is bound to. That his mother's "nurturing instincts ran to rather erratic extremes" reflects the basic fear of the inaccessibility and unpredictability of the big Other which one is ruled by.

Given this, my claim is that these "erected complex structures" that he describes are designed simply to search for empathy and identification in his "hens"/"subjects". He becomes the big Other in these "contracted rituals where power is freely given and taken and submission ritualized and control ceded and and then returned of my own free will. [Laughter.] Of the subject's rather. Will." The Freudian slip there intimates his belief that the will truly lies with the big Other. Then the "climax" of his entire ritual is his final prompt, "Are(n't) you frightened?", and the subsequent response. He is looking for empathy, for his subject to be frightened of the big Other but still assure both herself and he, the big Other, that she is freely choosing to be dominated. And after "these assurances" is not the expected hideous behavior but "weep[ing]" and "beg[ging] compassion". This strange ending I think works to convince us that the man's behavior is universal and human, just as he is trying to convince himself of his fear of the big Other.
