# The artist and interpretation

One of the ideas addressed in *Cat's Eye* is the tangled relationship between the artist and her art. The tangles priarily arise out of the fact that art is public, i.e. out of others' interpretation of her art.

Elaine's art in highly personal: it's filled with images of people from her life (e.g. herself, her parents and brother, Mrs. Smeath, Jon, Josef, the virgin Mary), as well as objects from her life (the blue cat's eye marble, her parents' car, the Smeaths' church). And it seems Elaine's perspective on her art is that it's simply personal expression, fueled by raw emotion and memory, never by grand concepts or within the framework of cultural movements, as they are often interpreted to be by the public. Specifically, her art is often categorized as a part of the feminist movement, and interpreted within this category. These interpretations are quite divergent from the personal experiences inspiring the art: perhaps the starkest example is the feminist interpretation of Elaine's painting in homage to her brother's randomly tragic death. This is a classic warning against the possible danger in over-categorizing.

Elaine's seeming disdain for the retrospective being held for her makes sense in this light too (the other light of course being that being in Toronto unearths all this pain that she has experienced). And more generally perhaps the text questions the public's strong (and of course natural/inevitable) attachment of the artist to her art. When we experience enjoyable or inspiring art, it is human nature to attach significance and value to the artist. But maybe this makes very little sense: the artist's relationship to her art is deeply personal, and mostly likely deeply different to consumers' interpretations of the art. It's not that the consumers are *wrong*, by the way, it's just that the notion that one is understanding the artist through her art is probably a rather false one. So maybe inviting an artist to her retrospective is misguided.

Elaine even resists being called an *artist* at all. While in school, thinking of oneself as an artist is pretentious, but this resistance persists into her adulthood; in the present narrative she still thinks of herself as a *painter*, and recoils when she is explicitly called an artist. This is symbolic of her philosophy of her art: she simply paints, and is resentful of being attached to grand artistic goals or agendas.
