A line in *Infinite Jest* that I think is crucial is Lyle's advice: "Do not underestimate objects." This has to do with the necessity of actively relating to the objects in the world to avoid getting lost in the self. (See the notes on transcendence in *Infinite Jest* for more, including the relation of this idea to the existentialist concepts of transcendence and facticity.)

My absolute favorite passage in *Atocha* calls back to this advice:

> Her Spanish, like Teresa's poem, became a repository or whatever meaning I assigned it, and I felt I understood, although I knew I was talking to myself. It was as if she said: Think about the necklace. Think about the making of the necklace. About Isabel's brother's notebook. I could hear what she was actually saying beneath this and I heard myself respond but all of that was very distant. It was as if she said: Imagine her btother writing. Think of the little scrap of paper Teresa tore from her novel and put into your notebook. Think of the hash transported inside one body as a solid and expelled and sold and then drawn into your body as vapor and gas. Think of the bombers purchasing the backpacks. Always think of the objects. Think of the necklaces and novels and bodies torn apart by the blast. Think of the making of the necklaces and the novels and the bodies and Isabel's brother in the crushed red car. But then think of a poster of Michael Jordan on the wall of Isabel's brother's room while he wrote the years down in the notebook. Where is that poster now. And think of the field opposite the telephone pole her brother wrapped her car around. How you can turn your attention away from the crushed red car and his body and walk into the field where nothing is happening, just indifferent wind in the indifferent grass, but a particular wind in particular grass. You can stay there for as long as you want, easily blocking out the sirens. Or you can enter the poster with the sea of camera flashes as Michael Jordan jumps and you can leave the arena as the crowd is roaring and walk into the Chicago of the recent past where novels are being written and necklaces are being made and gases are being inhaled and dates are being memorized by brains and brains destroyed in crashes. You can see all of this from a great height and soom out until it is no longer visible or you can zoom in on the writing hand or the face of the dead, zoom in until it's no longer a face. Or you can click on something and drag it. You can adjust the color or you can make it black and white. You can view any object from any angle or multiple angles simultaneously or you can shut your eyes and listen to the crown in the arena or the sirens slowly approaching the red car or the sound of the pen writing down the years as silver is hammered and shaped. [pp. 144--145]

Again, the message is that you have to be tied to the world, and experience your experiences. You can't abstract everything away into ideas and images that you can manipulate and drag and zoom and distance yourself from one. You have to keep objects and reality close to you. This of course is also a key philosophical motivation for *My Struggle*---see my notes on the project of volume 1 for more, but the ideas there feel particularly related to Lerner's use of the zooming and clicking and dragging. Both Lerner and Knausgaard intimate that all the data available at our fingertips make things abstract and lose color ("make it black and white") and meaning.
